Good morning, my name is Bob Wilson,
and together with a few of my colleagues,
I'm going to talk with you
today about some great new
features in the LLVM compiler.
So,
a better compiler is really significant
because we believe that a better compiler
can help you guys to make better apps.
And there's three ways we can do that:
performance, productivity, and quality.
Performance is really important
because you want your apps to
run quickly and be responsive.
The compiler can help you by
optimizing your code to run quickly.
compiler can help your productivity by
making sure that it itself runs quickly,
so that you don't have to
spend a lot of time sitting
around waiting for your builds.
And we can also help your productivity by
having the compiler support new language
features that make it easier for you
to write correct and efficient code.
And finally, quality is essential.
Nobody wants to use a buggy app.
Every time that you build
your project in Xcode,
the compiler is going to
look for suspicious things,
and it will warn you before
you even hit those problems.
You can also periodically
run the Static Analyser,
which is based on the compiler,
to find more subtle
problems in your code.
So these are three areas where
the compiler can help you.
Xcode 4.4 has a new version
of the Apple LLVM compiler,
version 4.0,
and we're going to talk about some
of those new features here today.
Before we do that,
I want to say a few things about LLVM.
LLVM is represented by
the Dragon logo here,
it's an open source project
to develop compilers and other
low-level development tools.
One of the distinctive things about
LLVM is its modular architecture,
where it's built upon a set of
reusable components that can be
combined together in interesting ways.
So some of these components
are the Clang parser,
which is a unified C, C++,
and Objective-C parser.
Runs really fast,
and it has great informative
diagnostics to help you understand
the problems that the compiler finds.
We have a sophisticated optimizer
to make your code run fast,
and we have code generators, assemblers,
and disassemblers for both
Intel and ARM processors.
So together with those components,
we also have some runtime libraries.
libc++, which we're going to talk
about in a few minutes,
is our C++ runtime library.
And we also have a lower level
compiler support runtime.
We can then combine all of those
different components and runtime
libraries to create stand-alone tools.
So starting with the LLVM compilers
is the most obvious one.
The LLVM compiler builds upon all
of those things shown below it,
and you'll see this whenever
you build your project in Xcode.
And of course,
you can also run the compiler
directly from the command line.
The Xcode Static Analyser is
built on top of the Clang parser,
combined with sophisticated
analysis to understand what
your code is really doing.
And this is also integrated into
Xcode when you run the analyze step,
in a nice way to actually
be able to visualize and see
the results of that analysis.
and finally we have the LDB debugger.
The debugger uses the Clang parser,
the code generator and the
disassembler and forms the
basis of the Xcode debugger.
The Clang parser itself is
integrated directly into Xcode to
support features like indexing,
code completion,
live warnings and fixits.
So I hope this gives you a feeling for
how the architecture of LLVM really
lets us do some powerful things.
We can reuse these components,
we get consistency across the tools
and we get this really powerful
integration into the Xcode IDE.
Now, if you're familiar with our tools,
you may notice one thing that's
missing from this list here,
and that's LLVM GCC.
LLVM GCC is a hybrid.
It's a combination of the old GCC 4.2
parser with an older version of the
LLVM Optimizer and Code Generator.
This was a stopgap solution
that we created to ease the
transition from GCC over to LLVM.
We finished that transition now,
and we've no longer been adding any new
features or even fixing bugs in LLVM GCC.
So it's really time for
everyone to stop using that.
And in fact,
we're going to be removing that
from Xcode in the near future.
So please move to the LLVM compiler.
So with that context,
I'd like to go on and
talk about performance,
which is the first of the focus
areas we're going to cover today.
As a compiler team, performance is near
and dear to our hearts.
Some of us stay up at night thinking
about how we can squeeze a few more
cycles out of some important code.
And we also work really,
really hard to make sure that
the compiler itself runs quickly.
There's no way I can talk
about all the performance
enhancements we've added recently,
so I've just picked three
of them to highlight today.
So let's start by talking
about the Arc Optimizer.
Arc, or automated reference counting,
is this great feature we introduced
last year to make you more productive.
If you use Arc,
you no longer have to manually
insert retains and releases
into your Objective-C code.
Let's look at how this works.
So I've put up a simple example
here of a debug logging method.
It takes a string as an argument
and just writes it out with NSLog.
From the perspective of Arc,
the important thing here is that
from the time you enter the method
to the point where you call NSLog,
we have to make sure that
nothing is going to release
the string out from under us.
So the compiler will just automatically
insert a retain for that string
S at the beginning of the method
and then release it at the end.
And in fact, if you build an unoptimized
debug version of this code,
that's basically what you'll get.
Now, as an experienced programmer,
you may look at this and say,
that's kind of silly.
There's really no way that the
string could be released out
from under you because nothing
happens before you call NSLog.
If you run an optimized
build of this code,
the compiler will automatically
run the Arc Optimizer.
It analyzes it and
realizes this is silly,
and it optimizes the way
that retain and release.
This kind of optimization has been
in LLVM from day one with Arc.
So let's talk about
something new this year.
We have a lot of improvements
to this Arc Optimizer,
and I can't unfortunately
cover all of them.
So again, I've just picked one example,
and that's the case of nested retains.
And to illustrate that,
let's look at a more complicated
version of that debug logging method.
Again, it takes a string,
and so Arc will insert a
retain for the string S.
Now, unlike the previous version,
there's a copy from S to a new string T,
so a reference to the same string.
And Arc will also insert a retain for T.
Now at this point, well I should say this
is a contrived example.
I'm sure you wouldn't
actually write this code.
But in a more complicated method,
there may be reasons where you
would insert a copy like that.
And it can also happen when
the compiler inlines functions.
So the Arc Optimizer can
look at this and realize,
I've retained the same string twice.
As long as the string is
retained at least once,
there's no way it can be released.
So that second retain is
completely unnecessary.
And the Arc Optimizer,
now in version 4 of the compiler,
will optimize that away.
What about the other retainer?
Can we get rid of that as well?
In this case, unfortunately, you can't.
If you look inside the method,
it's now a little more complicated.
It's checking a logging-enabled flag.
And then, before it calls NSLog,
it's sending an increment
log count message.
It's highly unlikely that increment log
count is going to release the string.
But the compiler can't know that.
It's hypothetically possible
that the string that was passed
in is in a global variable.
Somebody could make an increment
log count implementation that
would actually release that string.
And the compiler has to be correct.
It has to be safe.
So we can't get rid of
the retain in this case.
But that doesn't mean
we can't optimize it.
The compiler isn't smart enough to
realize it can move the retain and
release inside that conditional,
so that if logging is disabled,
you don't pay the cost of the retain.
So that's just one example of a
lot of nice improvements to the
Arc Optimizer that should make
your code run faster than with
previous versions of the compiler.
Let's go on and talk about
another performance area,
which is support for Intel's AVX.
AVX is a vector processing extension.
It's available in recent
versions of Intel processors,
the Sandy Bridge and
Ivy Bridge processors.
So basically,
most of the new Macs from the
last year or so will support AVX.
And it's really powerful.
Compared to the older SSE,
the AVX vectors are twice as wide,
256 bits instead of 128.
So it's very powerful.
It's not going to help every application,
though.
It's an entirely
floating-point optimization.
So it's a good fit for applications
that are floating-point intensive and
typically works best where there's a high
ratio of computation to memory bandwidth,
where you're actually
doing a lot of computation.
So if you think that your
application may fit that profile,
it might be worth taking a
look at optimizing for AVX.
And let's look at an example
to show how you can do that.
This is just a simple matrix addition,
and the code up here is going to
step through two input matrices.
It's going to load eight elements
at a time into two vectors,
A and B.
It's going to add them to a new vector,
C,
and then store it back out to the result.
You can see it's using some
intrinsic function calls here.
Intel's defined a standard
set of intrinsics,
and LLVM 4.0 supports the full
set of those standard intrinsics,
which is really great.
It's powerful because it lets you
have full access to the functionality
of AVX and a lot of control.
It can be a little bit hard to read,
especially if you're not familiar
with all those intrinsics.
So a nice option is to use
the OpenCL vector syntax.
So you can directly dereference pointers
to those vectors and just load them up.
We can now do the add as just A plus B,
and it's much easier for you
to understand what's going on.
You can mix and match the syntax
with the intrinsic calls as well.
So for the simple operations like adds,
you can use the OpenCL syntax.
For more complicated things
that you can't directly
represent with C operators,
you can use the intrinsics.
How much performance does this buy you?
So I took that same example,
I implemented an SSE version
and a scalar version that just
adds one element at a time.
So this graph is showing a speedup
relative to the scalar version.
The SSE implementation speeds
up more than three times,
so that's good.
And AVX version running on
the same machine speeds up by
about four and a half times.
So it's a significant step up.
This is kind of a small example.
In your own code,
you may see either larger
or smaller speedups,
but I think it's good enough
to illustrate the point
that there's potentially a
really significant win here.
If you want to use AVX,
there's one complication,
and that's you will want your
code to run on older Macs as well.
And what that means is you
need to implement not only
the AVX optimized version,
but an SSE version.
And then check at runtime whether the
hardware you're running on supports AVX,
and if not,
fall back and use the SSE version.
So to do that, put the AVX code into
separate source files,
compile just those source
files with AVX enabled,
and then insert a runtime check.
You can use the syscontrol interface
to check if AVX is supported,
and then switch between
those two implementations.
But in the cases where it works,
it's really a significant win for
floating-point intensive applications.
One last performance area,
and that's the integrated ARM assembler.
Previous versions of the LLVM compiler
for ARM would write out an assembly file,
and then invoke the system assembler
to read that file in and parse it,
translate it to machine code,
and write out an object file.
There's a lot of overhead
involved in that.
We want to cut out that overhead
so the compiler runs faster.
And now in version 4,
the compiler can just generate
that object file directly,
so it runs faster.
This is a feature we've had
on Intel for a while now,
and I'm really pleased to say
it's supported for ARM as well.
Besides the build time improvements,
a nice feature of this is
you get better error checking
if you have inline assembly.
The compiler will look at that and
understand it and report errors to you.
And the only thing you really
have to watch out for is if you've
got some really old ARM assembly,
this integrated assembler only
supports ARM's modern unified syntax.
So if you've got some really old stuff,
you may need to either update
the syntax or build with the
integrated assembler disabled.
But those are rare cases.
For almost all of you,
the result of this will just be that
your builds run faster than they used to.
So those are three performance
improvements that I wanted
to highlight for you today.
And now I'd like to invite
Doug Gregor to come up and talk
about some new language features.
So, new language features.
There's a bunch of new language
features available in the
Apple LLVM compiler version 4.
So we've talked a bit this week about
the new Objective-C language features,
like numeric literals, array literals,
dictionary literals, and so on.
These are all available in the
Apple LLVM compiler version 4.
But we've talked a lot about Objective-C.
I don't want to talk
about Objective-C anymore.
I want to talk about C++.
Thank you.
There's always a sum of
people in the room like that.
So there's a new C++ standard,
the C++11 standard.
It was ratified late last
year by the committee.
And it's been 13 years since
the original 1998 C++ standard.
And since then,
there's been a lot of improvements
in the C++ language and the
standard library that comes with it.
Now, there are lots of improvements,
but we can sort of pigeonhole them
into a couple different places.
So many of the improvements are
targeted at simplifying common idioms.
So the things that C++
programmers do day in and day out,
C++11 tries to make them easier,
more concise, more safe.
C++11 is also about performance,
so it introduces new features to
help you make your code run faster.
And finally, one of the areas C++ has
traditionally been very good
is in describing expressive,
efficient software lines
and in describing the
application software libraries.
And so there's new features in
the C++11 language to make it
easier to build those libraries.
Now, all of this is done with a very
strong focus on backward compatibility
so that your apps that build as
C++98 apps today will compile and
run the same way as C++11 apps.
Now, last year,
we actually started introducing
C++11 support with version 3
of the Apple LLVM compiler.
And since then, we've been hard at work
implementing more and more of
this very large C++11 standard.
With version 4 of the
Apple LLVM compiler,
we've introduced many of the
highly requested features,
such as generalized initializer lists,
generalized constant expressions,
or constexpr, and lambda expressions.
Now, we're going to talk about
a couple of these features,
skewing toward the ones that
can improve productivity.
That's what we find is
most important for people.
But before we dig into the
language side of the equation,
we're going to talk
about the C++11 standard,
the C++11 standard library.
Now you can't have a great C++11
solution unless you have both a C++11
compiler to support the languages
and a C++11 standard library to
provide all the library facilities.
There's two general reasons for this.
First reason is that the language and the
library in C++ are somewhat intertwined.
So some of the features we
think of as language features,
like initializer lists,
they're really only truly useful
when you also have the C++11
standard library backing them up.
Things like move semantics,
you can use them without a C++11 library,
but you're not going to see the
benefits unless your library has
been optimized for move semantics.
But the C++11 library isn't
just a language support library.
There's actually a lot of
new great features in C++11,
like smart pointers.
So the smart pointers help automate your
memory management for your C++ objects,
kind of like Arc does it for
your Objective-C objects,
through use of-- by
describing your ownership.
So you have a unique pointer
to describe unique ownership,
shared pointer for shared ownership,
weak pointer to weakly
point at a shared object.
And these can help you eliminate
the trouble of matching up
all of your news and deletes.
There's also regular expressions.
There's concurrency support
through threading and atomics,
and a lot of other features to help
you build good C++ apps in C++11.
Now, here at Apple,
we've been working on a
new implementation of the
C++11 standard library.
It's part of the LLVM project,
and it's called libc++.
So this is a ground-up
implementation intended for complete
C++11 standards conformance.
Now, it also gracefully
degrades for C++ 98 and 03.
So you can migrate to the libc++ standard
library with your C++ 98 app first,
and then change into compiling for C++
11 to get a complete C++ 11 solution.
Now, libc++, it's a new library.
We've been working on
it for several years,
and it's a ground-up implementation
where we got to focus on performance.
And in focusing on performance,
we've created better data structures
that require less memory and are faster,
and highly tuned algorithms,
so that your uses of the
standard library will be more
efficient and take less memory.
libc++ is a replacement for the
current C++ standard library
that you're probably all using.
That old standard library is from GCC.
It hasn't been touched in years.
And so we want you to migrate
forward to the new libc++ library.
The good news is that
migrating to libc++ is very,
very easy, because libc++ as a standard
library implementation and
C++11 as a new standard are both
largely backward compatible.
So for most applications,
you just switch to libc++ and
switch to C++11 at the same time.
Your code will just compile and build.
So the only thing that we've seen
trip up migration moving to libc++
is due to the library tr1 components.
So these were some
transitional components that
the committee had worked on,
and these features have
actually moved into C++11.
So if you're using them from
the old GCC standard library,
you just need to update your includes
to remove the tr1 slash and update
your namespace references to eliminate
the tr1 there and use the new
C++11 versions of these components.
So that's the new libc++
C++ standard library.
Let's talk about some language features
and how they can actually help you be
more productive when working in C++.
So, one of the major problems
that C++ has is verbosity.
So this is one of my
least favorite loops,
because all I want to do is walk
over the views in this vector.
Simple operation,
and yet I have these two lines of
for loop header just to do that.
One of the big problems there is
I have to write this iterator type.
I write hundreds of these
iterator types during the day,
and they're all almost identical.
So C++11 introduces this
wonderful new feature of auto.
What auto does is it tells the compiler,
"Please fill in the type for me.
I don't want to write it."
And this is not magic.
It's just a placeholder
that the compiler will use.
And when the compiler sees it,
it will go look at the initializer.
So look at the initializer
v is v stop again,
compute the type,
which it had to do anyway,
and then fill it in for you.
Great feature.
Saves a ton of typing.
Now, by default,
when you use an auto variable,
you're going to get a copy of
whatever you're initializing with.
Almost always, that's the right answer.
It's certainly the right answer here,
because that's what we're iterating over.
But if you actually want to
reference instead of a copy,
that's perfectly fine.
Just use auto reference.
Our loop is better.
Our loop is not perfect.
C++ 11 also has the for range loop.
For range loop should look very
familiar to anyone who's used
Objective-C because it's almost
identical to a fast enumeration loop.
We're using the colon rather than in,
but otherwise the syntax is the same.
We just say for every view
in the container views,
do something.
Notice--
and notice that we're using
auto here as well because,
hey,
why bother to write NSView star again?
We know that when we're
walking over views,
we've got a view.
Now, the for range loop works with any
of the standard library containers,
and it also works with anything
else that has begin and end
functions that return iterators.
So if you have containers that
have been following conventions
of the standard library,
the for range loop just
works with those too.
Now, we love using auto.
However, in Objective C++,
we have to be a little
bit careful with auto,
because sometimes using auto without
care can change the meaning of
your program in surprising ways.
So here's a really simple method.
All we're gonna do is grab a
view out of an NSArray of views.
Well, this typing NSVU is far
too much typing for me.
I want to use auto instead.
This program is still correct.
It'll probably still compile,
but we've actually
changed the meaning here.
And the reason is, ObjectAtIndex doesn't
actually return an NSView.
What it returns is ID.
So when the compiler sees an
ID on the right-hand side,
it decides that View must
have the type of ID.
This is correct behavior.
Your program will probably
still do exactly the same thing.
But what you've actually done here
is you've lost a little bit of the
static types of information that
you used to have in your program.
Because uses of View used to
know that it was an NSView.
And therefore,
you get warnings if you accidentally
convert that NSView over to an NSString.
Or if you try to send a message
that isn't available on NSViews,
you would get a warning.
You no longer get those warnings,
because you can do anything with an ID.
You'll also notice other features,
like code completion won't
be as precise anymore,
because that static type
information is gone.
So the moral here is that Auto is
really great for C++ types.
It can save you a lot of typing.
But when you're using
Auto in Objective C++ code,
and you're working with methods that
may return ID or you're not sure,
don't use Auto, just use the typing that
you've used before so you keep
that static type information.
So let's talk about some new features.
Initializing containers in C++,
and formerly in Objective-C,
is actually really, really painful.
So here we have to declare the vector,
and then we call the
pushback over and over again,
copying these pushback calls.
It's really, really tedious.
There must be a better way.
In C++ 11, there is a better way,
and that's to use the generalized
initializer list syntax.
So obviously this is far cleaner than
calling pushback a hundred times.
It's also nice because it generalizes
existing facilities of language.
Initializer lists have always been there.
If we were initializing an array,
we could have used an initializer list.
Now we can do it for
arbitrary containers as well.
Of course,
this works for any of the containers
in the C++ standard library.
So you can initialize a map with
key value pairs very easily with
these nested initializer lists.
The caveat here, of course,
is that you need a C++ 11
standard library for this to work.
So if you want to use
generalized initializer lists,
you're going to need to use libc++,
which provides the library
facilities to make the initializer
list feature work nicely.
Now it turns out you can use
initializer lists in other places.
This is then just after the equal
sign when initializing a variable.
For example, you can use them in an
insert call into a map,
where usually you'd
have to write this big,
long std make pair call to put
the key and the value into a pair.
You can just pass it almost
like a tuple of a key and value
using an initializer list.
So hold that thought of the tuple,
because it turns out that with
generalized initializer lists,
and with the new features of
the C++ 11 standard library,
we've made it very,
very easy to do something cool.
Which is multiple return
values with a very nice,
clean syntax.
So here our min-max function
wants to return two values.
How do you do that in C++?
Well, you don't.
You have one pass-by reference.
But in C++ 11,
you can say return a tuple.
And it can be a tuple of
any number of elements.
They can have any type,
whatever you specify.
And when you actually
initialize that tuple,
you just use an initializer list.
Very clean, very natural syntax for
returning multiple values.
Well, what about using that?
Because our user probably doesn't
actually want to get a tuple back.
Well, there's also really nice
syntax for this as well.
And that's through the
tie library facility.
You can tie up a couple local variables
and assign to the result of that tie
from the min-max to say get the minimum,
get the maximum, add separate variables,
and continue on with our code.
Very, very nice,
natural way to do multiple
return values in C++ 11.
Let's talk about lambdas.
This is a very, very,
very highly requested feature.
And so lambdas are a nice
way of packaging up code,
in this case a comparison operation,
and passing them off
to another operation.
The syntax should look very familiar
to you if you've used Objective-C,
because it's very,
very similar to blocks.
Lambdas and blocks are two
different features that try
to address the same problem.
Both of them are essentially creating
anonymous functions or closures,
we can pass off to another
routine to do some operation.
Now you see some syntactic
differences here.
We're using the open and closed
square brackets rather than the caret.
And the return type for a
lambda is in a different place.
It's this optional arrow type at the end.
Other than that, the syntax and the
usages are very similar.
However, the semantics,
the behavior of blocks
and lambda expressions are
different in some subtle ways.
So to understand those,
we're going to go a little
bit into how blocks work,
and then we can contrast
those with how lambdas work,
so you can make an educated decision
about what is best for your code.
So let's take our sorting example
and let's make the assumption
that this strings array that
we were sorting is really,
really, really big.
It's so big that we really want
to sort it on a different thread,
and then later on we'll join up with our
thread to actually look at the results.
So we'll do that with
Grand Central Dispatch.
Call the dispatch async, pass it a block,
and inside that block you can
do the sorting of strings.
This code looks good,
but this code actually
has an error in it.
And the reason for the error is that this
block is referring to the vector strings.
Now, what does that mean?
Well, when you refer to something
that's outside of the block,
from inside the block,
so refer to a variable,
that variable has to be captured,
meaning it has to be
pulled into the block.
By default,
a block is going to capture by value,
which means that we make a copy of
the data structure of that variable
and put that copy inside the block.
Now, immediately,
this sounds like both a performance
and a correctness problem.
First,
we're making this copy of something
that we already said was large.
But second, if we sort the copy,
we're never going to see
the results anywhere.
So that's not the reason
for the compiler error.
The reason for the compiler error is
that because this is so dangerous to be
working modifying a copy of something,
by default,
by-value captures are captured as const.
You can't modify them.
So the compiler error you're actually
getting here is that you can't
sort a constant vector of strings.
Now,
by-value captures within Objective C++
for blocks also have this nice other
behavior that when you capture something
that's actually an Objective C object,
it's going to retain that
object automatically for you,
so you know it doesn't go away.
What we really want here is
we want to fix this problem.
We want to make this code correct
and eliminate the compiler error.
And the way we do that is
with double_block variables.
So if we mark the strings
variable as double_block,
what it does is it tells any
blocks that refer to that variable
to capture it by reference,
so that all of those blocks and the
main thread of control all see the
same version of this strings vector.
Now, one thing you may not know
is that by reference captured
variables actually do get copied.
They get copied once at the
time when you pass off-- when
Grand Central Dispatch takes in your
block and does a block copy on it.
Now,
the reason for that copy is that when
we first come into this function here,
strings is allocated on the stack.
When we pass a block off
to Grand Central Dispatch,
we have no assurances that
that stack is still gonna be
there when we call the block.
And so what the compiler does for
safety reasons is it makes one copy of
that strings variable out on the heap,
and then everyone that refers
to that strings variable
now points at the heap copy,
which can live longer
than the stack frame.
Altogether,
this means that our application now
actually does work because we're all
referring to the same strings variable,
we're allowed to sort
it because it's mutable,
and we will see the results later
on once we sync up with GCD.
That's how blocks work.
Let's look at the same
issues for lambdas.
So we're gonna change our block, caret,
to open/close square brackets
to introduce a lambda.
First thing we're going to
see is a compiler error.
This is for a different reason than
our first compiler error with blocks,
though.
See, the open and close brackets
introduces a lambda,
but what's really stating is,
is this an empty lambda capture list?
And because it's an empty capture list,
it means this lambda is not allowed
to refer to any variables from the
outside scope that have to capture.
So when it tries to refer to strings,
the error the compiler's
going to tell you is,
"Well,
I can't capture strings because I'm
not allowed to capture anything."
So let's tell it, capture strings.
Well, we can do that by putting the name
of the variable we want to capture
in between those square brackets.
So now we're capturing
the variable strings,
and we're going to get another error.
Now this is similar to
the first blocks error,
because when you just name the variable
strings here in the open square brackets,
it's going to capture by copy.
Same semantics as blocks
for the most part.
We're going to copy the
variable into the lambda.
It's going to be const,
so we can't modify it.
Again, that's our compiler error.
We can't sort something that's const.
And the one difference in the by-value
captures of lambdas versus in blocks
is that for Objective-C objects
that are captured by value,
we do not retain them
when creating the lambda.
So they're retained by blocks,
not by lambdas.
Again, let's fix this example.
Let's actually make it work with lambdas,
and we're going to do that
with a by-reference capture.
Same solution as we saw with the blocks,
except different syntax and
slightly different semantics.
So the by-reference capture,
you put an ampersand before the variable
name within the capture list to say,
"I want to capture this by reference."
Variables captured by reference
in a lambda are never copied.
You're actually getting
a direct reference to the
element that is on the stack.
[Transcript missing]
Now,
this is only available in Objective-C++.
And the reason for that is
that when we do this conversion
from a lambda to a block,
we create a new block.
And that block needs to be managed.
Its memory needs to be managed.
And so we return it as
retain-auto-released,
using the Objective-C memory subsystem
to give you back a block that's
going to live long enough and,
of course, can be block-copied if
it needs to live longer.
Of course, the Arc Optimizer will kick
in here to eliminate this
retain-auto-release pair in many,
many, many cases,
but it still can be there
in certain rare cases.
So, let's step back and look at blocks
and lambdas at a high level.
They're intending to provide
essentially the same feature of these
anonymous functions or closures.
They both allow capture by copy,
they both allow capture by reference.
Blocks skew toward safety,
so they'll make sure that they
retain Objective-C objects
when you do a by-value capture,
so those things don't go away.
They make sure to copy your
by-reference captures out to the heap,
so that you can't have dangling
references within your blocks.
However, beyond that,
when using our APIs,
you have flexibility to use
whatever is right for your problem,
because both Blocks and
Lambdas work with all of the
Blocks-based APIs on our system.
So what should you use?
Should you use blocks,
should you use lambdas?
So our recommendation is
generally for Objective C++ code,
you should use blocks.
The reason, they're succinct,
they're well understood by
the Objective C community,
and they skew towards safety,
so you're more likely to have a correct
application if you just use the blocks,
because it's going to make sure
that your objects are retained,
your references don't dangle.
Now, there are good reasons
to use lambdas as well.
You might be in a portable C++11
code base that already has lambdas.
In that case,
just continue using lambdas.
You may want to have really precise
control over how captures work.
You want to write out that
explicit capture list and
say how each thing works.
Lambdas are really good
for that sort of thing.
And finally,
if you're working with C++ and templates,
the compiler can do a lot more
optimization when you're passing
a lambda expression to a C++
template than it can with a block
passed to that same template,
even though both will work.
So with that, let's talk about the
deployment story for C++11.
So of course, C++11, it's available now.
The language features work anywhere.
For the libc++ library to get
the full C++11 experience,
you can build your apps and deploy
them back to iOS 5 and MacOSX Lion.
So we think C++ 11 is a really great
revision of the C++ language and library.
So we're moving the C++
defaults towards C++ 11.
In Xcode 4.4,
you'll see that any new projects
start with C++ 11 as a language.
In Xcode 4.5, we're going to move
the default to libc++,
so that by default,
new projects going forward will
use the full C++ 11 language.
Of course, there's absolutely no reason
to wait until you start your
next projects to do C++ 11.
You can just go in and change
your build settings so that
you're using the GNU++ 11,
which is the most compatible
C++ 11 setting for the language,
and use the libc++ C++ 11
library to give you complete,
very useful C++ 11
solution for your apps.
If you're a command line kind of person,
flags are up here to
use GNU++ 11 and libc++.
And with that, I'm going to turn it
over to Ted Kremenek,
who's going to talk about finding bugs
using Clang Compiler and Static Analyzer.
So just to recap,
we've been talking about different
ways that the compiler can improve
the quality of your applications.
We talked about performance
enhancements to the compiler
that we continue to do with every
release to make your app run faster,
so we encourage you to go
and re-compile your app.
And then throughout the week,
we've been talking about various
language improvements we've been making.
You know, we've talked extensively
about Objective-C.
Doug just talked about C++.
And this is a trajectory
that will continue,
you know, going forward.
So in this last part of the talk,
let's talk about ways that the compiler
can proactively find-- compiler-related
tools can proactively find issues
that are latent in your code.
The motivation is very simple.
We have this very large
ecosystem of applications,
and users notice quality, right?
Quality really matters.
And they can be very vocal
about what they think,
you know, about your application.
And quality can mean the difference
between them buying your app
and just steering clear of it,
you know, forever.
So it leaves a very lasting
impression in the App Store.
And we want to help with this by
making the compiler-related tools
be able to be more proactive at
finding issues before they ship.
And this is something we care
very much about and will continue
to improve going forward.
So how can we do this?
One very obvious way that we've
been doing for a long time is
finding issues using warnings,
right?
Warnings are awesome, right?
I mean, as you're coding,
they find bugs early, right?
And when we engineered the
Apple LLVM compiler from the ground up,
we cared very much about building a
system that could give you very clear,
explanatory diagnostics that could
work in the presence of macros,
templates, just all the natural stuff
that you use in your code.
And of course,
we provide fixes in many cases
when the compiler has fairly good
intelligence about discovering,
well, maybe this is what you meant.
This is the likely fix.
We've continued this trend in Xcode 4.4.
We've added much deeper static analysis,
which is the corollary of the compiler.
And we've added various compiler
warnings and static analyzer checks
that focus a lot on memory safety,
security, just general correctness.
And we've also improved the ways in
which you can control warnings and you
can tailor them more to your individual
workflow because some warnings make more
sense for other codebases versus others.
So we're gonna touch on all these topics.
So for those of you not familiar
with the differences between the
compiler and the Static Analyzers,
let's just step back and take a
look at what they're intended to do.
On one end of the spectrum,
if you think about trading
CPU time for finding issues,
we can think of the compiler
as being on one end,
where it's fast, it's always available,
and it's so fast,
we use it for code completion,
we provide live issues within Xcode.
And so it's really great.
It gives you instant feedback.
But because it has to be so fast,
it inherently does a more
shallow analysis of your code.
And so we kind of look at it as,
it can find some really important bugs,
but they're the ones
that are just harder,
I mean, easier to see,
kind of with the naked eye.
On the other end of the spectrum,
we have the Static Source Code Analyzer.
It's basically compiler analysis,
like on steroids, we trade CPU time for
finding more issues,
doing a deeper analysis of your code.
And so we look at it as, like,
kind of finding those
bugs that are more subtle,
harder to see.
You won't necessarily want to
run this analysis all the time,
but you're encouraged, obviously,
to proactively do so often.
Moreover, we can engineer intelligence
into the Static Analyzer that we
just can't do with the compiler.
We can teach it about common APIs,
like Grand Central Disk Ratch,
Core Foundation, and so forth,
things we just can't really
do very well in the compiler.
So to kind of understand the
differences between these
tools on a more concrete level,
let's look at one kind of
bug that they both can find.
And this is just a standard, you know,
using an uninitialized variable.
So if you run this code
example through the compiler,
this is the exact output
you'll see on the command line.
You'll get, you know,
a diagnostic saying that
you're using this variable
uninitialized when you return it.
It actually points to the line of code.
We show the warning flag on the
right side of the diagnostic.
And we even have a suggested fix-it here,
you know,
that you can silence the problem
by initializing the variable.
Now,
if we make this code just slightly more,
you know, complicated, right,
and this is a little bit contrived.
We're initializing a variable, you know,
by reference.
But we've all seen or written code
that looks something like this,
right?
The compiler actually can't find a
problem in this code because it just
takes a little bit deeper analysis.
We run the compiler over it,
and you're going to get no issues at all.
You run the Static Analyser
over it in Xcode 4.4,
we get this very rich diagnostic saying,
like, hey, you used this variable
uninitialized when you took this
particular path through your code,
where you took the false branch and bar,
you called foo, and then skipped over
initializing the object.
So very clear, very explanatory.
So let's look at the improvements
in the Static Analyzr.
In Xcode 4.3, which is our current
shipping version of Xcode,
the Analyzr works by essentially
analyzing each file one at a time.
And if we think of these as
the functions in the file,
it just iterates over those functions
and does a deep code analysis.
And here we have these functions,
foo and bar,
and in previous versions of the Analyzr,
they're just analyzed
completely separately.
So if we looked at the body of foo,
we just see that, you know,
this value is being written
to some memory location.
But if we don't really know
anything about that memory location,
there's no reason to assume
there's anything wrong.
Similarly, if we analyze bar without
any understanding of what
the function foo does,
there doesn't look like
there's anything wrong here.
So if you just imagine that
the body of foo wasn't here,
you yourself wouldn't really guess
that you were doing anything wrong,
right?
So, like,
there's obviously a problem here.
But this is essentially, you know,
the limited reasoning, you know,
boundary that was in previous
versions of the Analyzr.
In Xcode 4.4,
we've enhanced it for the analyzer
to look much more deeply into these
cross-functional dependencies.
So in this case,
we start by analyzing the function bar,
because we can see on a call
graph that it lies at the top.
And then when we contextually
see it calling foo,
it will flag a null to reference.
This one change greatly amplifies
the power of the Static Analyzers to
find a lot more issues in your code.
And we think that you're absolutely
going to love this enhancement.
[Transcript missing]
Let's look at a cussed of memcopy,
and that's memset.
Basically the same thing.
Instead of copying, you know,
some bytes from some other location,
you're just setting a range
of bytes to be the same value.
Here it looks like we're
doing everything right.
We're computing the size of the
destination object correctly.
But if this is C++ code,
this also might be subtly incorrect.
What if Y is some object that has,
you know, virtual methods, right?
That means there's a
V pointer in that object.
And so when you're memsetting here,
you're not just, like,
zero-initializing it.
You're just nuking that V table pointer.
And the compiler will
actually warn about this now,
too.
And we've heard from a very
credible game developer that
when they turn this warning on,
they found a large number
of bugs in their code base.
So it might seem a little contrived,
but this stuff happens all the time.
Let's talk about some
Static Analyser issues.
I had mentioned before how the
Static Analyser has a deep knowledge
of many of our framework APIs.
CF is something that's obviously
used extensively on OSX and iOS.
We have containers like CFArray,
CFDictionary, and so on.
One issue we've seen is with
portability between OSX and iOS.
We can have the difference
between 32-bit and 64-bit.
And there's cases where people
want to use their containers to
store things other than objects.
And they'll do clever things like,
here we have an array of ints.
Ints on a 32-bit architecture have
the same size as a pointer value,
so let's just do some tricks
here so that we can stuff an
array of ints into a CF set.
It turns out if you put
this on a 64-bit machine,
this is complete nonsense.
This is garbage.
And you're going to get
completely unpredictable results.
We strongly discourage
writing this kind of code.
It's a portability issue.
It's just very brittle.
That's not really how
the APIs were intended.
And on a 64-bit architecture,
this would be a security
or a correctness issue.
Thank you.
So let's talk about the last
bit about memory safety.
And these are, again,
just the highlights of some of the
things that we have added to both
the compiler and the Static Analyser.
And that's mallocan-free.
Mallocan-free are these low-level
memory management APIs that
we still use very frequently.
Arc does a great job of managing
your Objective-C objects,
but for mallocan-free,
you still need to manage
that memory yourself.
Now, we have great tools like
instruments and leaks to help
you try and find these issues,
but those tools are
limited in various ways.
First, you're going to only be able
to find leaks on code paths
that you yourself test,
right?
And memory leaks can often happen
on corner cases that maybe it's,
you know, just some case that you haven't
tested but your users encounter.
And also, it would be great if you
could just find these issues
proactively without having to do,
you know,
the extensive dynamic analysis later.
Oftentimes,
we can find these memory leaks
using static source code analysis.
It's not perfect.
You still should use tools
like instruments and so forth,
but we think this is going to
greatly enhance your ability
to find those problems early.
So here's a real example.
It's been slightly simplified to fit,
you know, well on this slide.
But essentially,
it's a case where we're calling
malloc and then we're returning early.
You run it through the
Static Analyser in Xcode 4.4.
You're going to get a
diagnostics like this,
and where we gave an explanation where,
you know, how the memory was allocated.
We even see that the pointer
was checked for validity.
And then on an early return path,
we said that the memory was leaked,
right?
This is a very localized, you know,
problem, right?
And you wouldn't have been able to
find it with the dynamic analysis
tool unless you were able to test
the case where set of data failed,
right?
So very subtle,
but you can find these issues
proactively using the Static Analyser.
So let's look at a real bug.
This is something
slightly more complicated.
And it's essentially the same bug
that I just showed you before.
We're returning early,
and we're failing to
deallocate something.
The details of this code
doesn't really matter.
The thing to keep in mind is the very top
we're calling this function parsePgArray,
where we were turning
allocated memory by reference.
So if you looked at
this like in isolation,
you wouldn't necessarily
know that that was the case,
right?
But because we have this new
cross-functional analysis,
the analyzer looks into the
implementation of this function.
And if you go to the navigation
bar that shows up in the editor,
you'll get a complete
abstract call stack.
and you can dive in and
see what's going on.
If I click on that,
I go into the body of parsePgArray.
I see the allocation from malloc,
and at the bottom we see that
memory getting assigned by
reference to the return value.
So this allows you to dive in,
write into the code to
see what's going on.
It's really, really powerful.
So we just highlighted a few things.
We've added enhancements
for finding issues with,
you know, Cocoa Touch APIs,
Grand Central Dispatch,
portability issues, and a whole bunch of
the low-level Unix APIs.
And we'll continue to improve the
Static Analyzers and the compiler in
these areas and others going forward.
So with all this new awesomeness, right,
how do you go and tailor
it to your workflow?
We talked about in the kickoff about how
controlling warnings is really important.
I'd like to divide that for the
compiler into two different approaches.
The standard approach you have right now
is the additive approach to warnings.
If you imagine that this gray bar is the
set of all possible compiler warnings,
there's some set of warnings
that are enabled by default.
These are the ones that we,
in our divine wisdom,
have decided that you should always see,
or at least see by default.
Then there's all these, like,
magical flags that exist to turn
on additional compiler warnings.
We have the misnamed WALL,
which doesn't actually turn
on all compiler warnings.
This really just came about
from historical expectations.
You know,
people started building their code
with WALL and pairing it with WAR,
which turns all warnings to errors.
And then whenever compiler
authors added new warnings to
WALL that they didn't like,
that those people didn't like,
those authors got yelled at.
So we have to add things,
new warnings to WL with a lot of care.
And then there's other
esoteric flags like -pandantic,
and then just a whole smorgasbord
of other compiler flags that you can
pass to turn on additional warnings.
So the problem is,
how do you know what all these flags are?
I mean,
it's a real discoverability issue.
We have to document these, of course,
but let's say you just want to
use all the warnings that are
available that make sense for you.
Should you go and look
at the release notes?
And I mean,
there's hundreds of compiler warnings.
So there's an inverse approach,
where you start with all warnings,
and you turn off the ones you don't want.
With the new -weverything flag,
or weverything,
you can truly turn on all the
warnings that are in the compiler.
Now, the one caveat is-- well,
there's two caveats.
One, if you upgrade compilers,
you should just basically expect
your code not to compile anymore
if you're passing w-error.
This is really the intended workflow,
right?
And the idea is that you immediately
are drawing attention to the new issues,
and you can decide either to fix
them or disable those warnings.
and you could do so
simply by passing the -w,
no, and the warning name
flag to the compiler.
So it's a very powerful workflow.
And as we saw earlier in the diagnostics,
the compiler will tell you what the
warning flag is when you see the warning,
right?
So there's no discoverability problem.
You know exactly how to
turn the warnings off.
Now,
the other caveat about this approach,
besides, you know, the w-air issue,
is that there are many warnings.
Some warnings are more like
coding-style conventions.
For example, we have the new default
synthesis feature in Xcode 4.4.
There is a warning for
transitioning from,
you know,
older code that's using explicit
synthesis to default synthesis.
And some people would like to
still be warned about explicitly,
you know, not explicitly synthesizing
your properties.
That is a coding-style warning.
If you don't want to see it,
which shouldn't apply to most of you,
just turn the warning off.
So that's the one caveat, is, like,
there's a lot of different warnings here.
Just cherry-pick the ones
that make sense for you.
Beyond just the command line,
you continue to have the power to control
compiler warnings within a source file.
Many of you may not be aware,
but we have these preprocessor pragmas,
which allow you to conditionally--
to suppress a warning within a
scope of text or even promote a
particular warning to an error.
And so this is documented on
the LLVM open source web page,
but the syntax is pretty simple,
as you can see right here.
You just say,
"Map this warning to an error,"
and just give the warning name.
Finally, we have improved the ability
to control analyzer issues.
We've expanded the Xcode build settings
to allow you to turn off and turn
on and turn off various checkers.
You can do this on a
per-project and target level,
and we will continue to enhance
this workflow going forward.
So to summarize,
we're very passionate that a better
compiler means better applications.
We care very much about the
quality of what you are producing
and putting on the App Store.
And your users obviously do too.
So in the LLVM compiler 4.0,
we've improved the performance of the
compiler for you to write better code.
It's faster.
The compiler itself is faster.
Great language improvements.
It reduces boilerplate.
It lets you let more elegant
code that's less error-prone.
And we've improved its ability
to find more issues early with
improved compiler warnings and
vastly improved static analysis.
There's a lot of places you
can look for more information.
Michael Jurowicz,
our developer tools evangelist.
The open source web pages have a
lot of information that you go to.
There's tips on using
the Static Analyser,
the Static Analyser open source page.
And we are directly available
on the developer forums.
So we're happy to meet
with you at the labs.
But we post on the developer
forums all the time.
So if you have questions or concerns,
you can reach many of us directly there.
And with that, we hope you enjoy the
rest of the conference.
Thank you.